# useState: tic tac toe

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/04.md`

### Don't mutate state

Don't mutate state in React because it's going to cause unexpected bugs. React
relies on the fact that anytime there's a state changes, it's going to trigger a
rerender. So if you're mutating things, you could have some stale closures that
are referencing the mutated values. It leads to pretty hard to track down bugs.

### Derived State

Derived state means that their value can be derived (or calculated) based on
other values rather than managed on their own. e.g. the `calculateNextValue`,
`calculateWinner`, `calculateNextStatus` functions in this project.

### What is a Re-render?

Updating the DOM (layout/reflow) is slow, that's why React uses Virtual DOM.
React team decided to batch DOM updates, so if there was a state change that
resulted in thirty DOM updates, they would all happen at once, rather than
running them one after another. To do this batching though, they would have to
take ownership over updating the DOM, so we have `React.createElement` (which is
what JSX is) to describe what we want the DOM to look like, and when there's a
state change, React calls our function again to get the React elements we need
rendered to the DOM. It then compares those new React elements with the ones we
gave it last time we rendered. From that it can tell what DOM updates to make,
and then makes those updates for us in the most performant way possible. The
process of updating the DOM is called "committing" because we're taking the
React elements that you "rendered" and "commit" those updates to the DOM.

A "render" is when React calls your function to get React elements.
"Reconciliation" is when React compares those React elements with the previously
rendered elements. A "commit" is when React takes those differences and makes
the DOM updates.

```
render → reconciliation → commit
      ↖                   ↙
           state change
```

To be clear:

- The "render" phase: create React elements `React.createElement`
- The "reconciliation" phase: compare previous elements with the new ones
- The "commit" phase: update the DOM (if needed. Just because a component is
  re-rendered, doesn't mean the DOM will be updated).

More
[here](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/fix-the-slow-render-before-you-fix-the-re-render)

## Background

A `name` is one thing, but a real UI is a bit different. Often you need more
than one element of state in your component, so you'll call `React.useState`
more than once. Please note that each call to `React.useState` in a given
component will give you a unique state and updater function.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.js)

We're going to build tic-tac-toe (with localStorage support)! If you've gone
through React's official tutorial, this was lifted from that (except that
example still uses classes).

You're going to need some managed state and some derived state:

- **Managed State:** State that you need to explicitly manage
- **Derived State:** State that you can calculate based on other state

`squares` is the managed state and it's the state of the board in a
single-dimensional array:

```
[
  'X', 'O', 'X',
  'X', 'O', 'O',
  'X', 'X', 'O'
]
```

This will start out as an empty array because it's the start of the game.

`nextValue` will be either the string `X` or `O` and is derived state which you
can determine based on the value of `squares`. We can determine whose turn it is
based on how many "X" and "O" squares there are. We've written this out for you
in a `calculateNextValue` function at the bottom of the file.

`winner` will be either the string `X` or `O` and is derived state which can
also be determined based on the value of `squares` and we've provided a
`calculateWinner` function you can use to get that value.

📜 Read more about derived state in
[Don't Sync State. Derive It!](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/dont-sync-state-derive-it)

### Alternate:

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/04-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/04-classes.js) to
practice that.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 preserve state in localStorage

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-1.js)

👨‍💼 Our customers want to be able to pause a game, close the tab, and then resume
the game later. Can you store the game's state in `localStorage`?

### 2. 💯 useLocalStorageState

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-2.js)

It's cool that we can get localStorage support with a simple `useEffect`, but
it'd be even cooler to use the `useLocalStorageState` hook that's already
written for us in `src/utils.js`!

Refactor your code to use that custom hook instead. (This should be a pretty
quick extra credit).

### 3. 💯 add game history feature

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/04.extra-3.js)

Open `http://localhost:3000/isolated/final/04.extra-3.js` and see that the extra
version supports keeping a history of the game and allows you to go backward and
forward in time. See if you can implement that!

NOTE: This extra credit is one of the harder extra credits. Don't worry if you
struggle on it!

💰 Tip, in the final example, we store the history of squares in an array of
arrays. `[[/* step 0 squares */], [/* step 1 squares */], ...etc]`, so we have
two states: `history` and `currentStep`.

💰 Tip, in the final example, we move the state management from the `Board`
component to the `Game` component and that helps a bit. Here's what the JSX
returned from the `Game` component is in the final version:

```javascript
return (
  <div className="game">
    <div className="game-board">
      <Board onClick={selectSquare} squares={currentSquares} />
      <button className="restart" onClick={restart}>
        restart
      </button>
    </div>
    <div className="game-info">
      <div>{status}</div>
      <ol>{moves}</ol>
    </div>
  </div>
)
```

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=04%3A%20useState%3A%20tic%20tac%20toe&em=).
